---
author: inhenkel
ms.topic: include 
ms.service: azure-video-indexer
ms.collection: ce-skilling-ai-copilot,rai-skilling-ai-copilot
ms.date: 10/09/2024
ms.author: inhenkel
title: transparency example use cases
---

## Example use cases for Azure AI Video Indexer

Azure AI Video Indexer can be used in multiple scenarios in a variety of industries, such as:  

- **Creating feature stories** at news or media agencies by implementing deep searches for specific people and/or words to find what was said, by whom, where and when. Facial identification capabilities are Limited Access. For more information, visit [Microsoft’s Limited Access policy](https://aka.ms/limitedaccesscogservices).  
- **Creating promos and trailers** using important moments previously extracted from videos. Azure AI Video Indexer can assist by adding keyframes, scene markers, timestamps and labelling so that content editors invest less time reviewing numerous files.
- **Promoting accessibility** by translating and transcribing audio into multiple languages and adding captions, or by creating a verbal description of footage via OCR processing to enhance accessibility for the visually impaired.
- **Improving content distribution to a diverse audience in different regions and languages** by delivering content in multiple languages using Azure AI Video Indexer’s transcription and translation capabilities.
- **Enhancing targeted advertising**, industries like news media or social media can use Azure AI Video Indexer to extract insights to enhance the relevance of targeted advertising.
- **Enhancing user engagement** using metadata, tags, keywords, and embedded customer insights to filter and tailor media to customer preferences.  
- **Moderating inappropriate content** such as banned words using textual and visual content control to tag media as child approved or for adults only.
- **Accurately and quickly detecting violence incidents** by classifying gunshots, explosions, and glass shattering in a smart-city system or in other public environments that include cameras and microphones.
- **Enhancing compliance with local standards** by extracting text in warnings in online instructions and then translating the text for example, e-learning instructions for using equipment.
- **Enhancing and improving manual closed captioning and subtitles generation** by leveraging Azure AI Video Indexer’s transcription and translation capabilities and by using the closed captions generated by Azure AI Video Indexer in one of the supported formats.
- **Transcribing videos in unknown languages** by using language identification (LID) or multi language identification (MLID) to allow Azure AI Video Indexer to automatically identify the languages appearing in the video and generate the transcription accordingly.
