---
title: Media transcription, translation, and language identification
ms.service: azure-video-indexer
ms.topic: include
ms.date: 08/08/2024
ms.author: inhenkel
---

## Media transcription, translation, and language identification

[!INCLUDE [transcription description](transcription-translation-lid-description.md)]

Azure AI Video Indexer (VI) processes the speech in the audio file to extract the transcription that is then translated into many languages. When selecting to translate into a specific language, both the transcription and the insights like keywords, topics, labels or OCR are translated into the specified language. Transcription can be used as is or be combined with speaker insights that map and assign the transcripts into speakers. Multiple speakers can be detected in an audio file. An ID is assigned to each speaker and is displayed under their transcribed speech.

**Language identification (LID)** recognizes the supported dominant spoken language in the video file. For more information, see [Applying LID](/azure/azure-video-indexer/language-identification-model). 

**Multi-language identification (MLID)** automatically recognizes the spoken languages in different segments in the audio file and sends each segment to be transcribed in the identified languages. At the end of this process, all transcriptions are combined into the same file. For more information, see [Applying MLID](/azure/azure-video-indexer/multi-language-identification-transcription).
The resulting insights are generated in a categorized list in a JSON file that includes the ID, language, transcribed text, duration, and confidence score.

When indexing media files with multiple speakers, Azure AI Video Indexer performs speaker diarization that identifies each speaker in a video and attributes each transcribed line to a speaker. The speakers are given a unique identity such as Speaker #1 and Speaker #2. This allows for the identification of speakers during conversations and can be useful in various scenarios such as doctor-patient conversations, agent-customer interactions, and court proceedings. 

## Media transcription, translation, and language identification use cases 

- Promoting accessibility by making content available for people with hearing disabilities using Azure AI Video Indexer to generate speech to text transcription and translation into multiple languages.
- Improving content distribution to a diverse audience in different regions and languages by delivering content in multiple languages using Azure AI Video Indexer’s transcription and translation capabilities. 
- Enhancing and improving manual closed captioning and subtitles generation by using Azure AI Video Indexer’s transcription and translation capabilities and by using the closed captions generated by Azure AI Video Indexer in one of the supported formats.
- Using language identification (LID) or multi language identification (MLID) to transcribe videos in unknown languages to allow Azure AI Video Indexer to automatically identify the languages appearing in the video and generate the transcription accordingly.

[!INCLUDE [get insights with the web portal](get-insights-web-portal.md)]
[!INCLUDE [get insights with the API](get-insights-api.md)]

## Example response

All the languages detected in the video are under sourceLanauge and each instance in the transcription sectin includes the trascribed language.

```json
    "insights": {
      "version": "1.0.0.0",
      "duration": "0:01:50.486",
      "sourceLanguage": "en-US",
      "sourceLanguages": [
        "es-ES",
        "en-US"
      ],
      "language": "en-US",
      "languages": [
        "en-US"
      ],
      "transcript": [
        {
          "id": 1,
          "text": "Hi, I'm Doug from office. We're talking about new features that office insiders will see first and I have a program manager,",
          "confidence": 0.8879,
          "speakerId": 1,
          "language": "en-US",
          "instances": [
            {
              "adjustedStart": "0:00:00",
              "adjustedEnd": "0:00:05.75",
              "start": "0:00:00",
              "end": "0:00:05.75"
            }
          ]
        },
        {
          "id": 2,
          "text": "Emily Tran, with office graphics.",
          "confidence": 0.8879,
          "speakerId": 1,
          "language": "en-US",
          "instances": [
            {
              "adjustedStart": "0:00:05.75",
              "adjustedEnd": "0:00:07.01",
              "start": "0:00:05.75",
              "end": "0:00:07.01"
            }
          ]
        },
```

[!INCLUDE [General transparency note](read-general-transparency-note.md)]
[!INCLUDE [transparency-transcription-translation-lid](transparency-transcription-translation-lid.md)]

## Sample code

[See all samples for VI](https://github.com/Azure-Samples/azure-video-indexer-samples)
